.. sip:class-description::
    :status: todo
    :brief: Used to generate fillable outlines for a given painter path
    :digest: 7710955b191ab56c3a91e67d73c06ae0

The :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPathStroker` class is used to generate fillable outlines for a given painter path.

By calling the :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPathStroker.createStroke` function, passing a given :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPath` as argument, a new painter path representing the outline of the given path is created. The newly created painter path can then be filled to draw the original painter path's outline.

You can control the various design aspects (width, cap styles, join styles and dash pattern) of the outlining using the following functions:

* :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPathStroker.setWidth`

* :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPathStroker.setCapStyle`

* :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPathStroker.setJoinStyle`

* :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPathStroker.setDashPattern`

The :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPathStroker.setDashPattern` function accepts both a :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtCore.Qt.PenStyle` object and a list representation of the pattern as argument.

In addition you can specify a curve's threshold, controlling the granularity with which a curve is drawn, using the :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPathStroker.setCurveThreshold` function. The default threshold is a well adjusted value (0.25), and normally you should not need to modify it. However, you can make the curve's appearance smoother by decreasing its value.

You can also control the miter limit for the generated outline using the :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPathStroker.setMiterLimit` function. The miter limit describes how far from each join the miter join can extend. The limit is specified in the units of width so the pixelwise miter limit will be ``miterlimit \* width``. This value is only used if the join style is :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtCore.Qt.PenJoinStyle.MiterJoin`.

The painter path generated by the :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPainterPathStroker.createStroke` function should only be used for outlining the given painter path. Otherwise it may cause unexpected behavior. Generated outlines also require the :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtCore.Qt.FillRule.WindingFill` rule which is set by default.

.. seealso:: :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QPen`, :sip:ref:`~PyQt6.QtGui.QBrush`.
